[SWOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[THEME MUSIC]
[MYSTERIOUS MUSIC]
>> In the beginning was
the word, and God said,
let there be light.
>> Most in the West are familiar
with the Christian concept,
in the beginning was the word.
God spoke the word and
the world into existence.
What most don't realize is that,
for example, in ancient Egypt,
they taught the same thing.
There was Ptah, the
god of technology,
who went into his heart
and felt the world
and then spoke it
into existence.
>> Almost universally, ancient
texts and traditions have
always placed sound at the
core of not only our existence,
but the existence of
the entire universe.
And it begins with the powerful
seed syllable, the ancient om,
which originally
was never spoken,
but it was felt in the body.
And this is where the
relationship between sound
and vibration becomes very
important, because ultimately
sound is only a vibration
brought into an audible range.
>> In the Hindu tradition,
the word was with Brahman,
and the word was Brahman.
The very first
Hebrew letter, aleph,
which starts the whole process
is also like an out breath.
It's like [EXHALE].
You know, it's a sound.
The sound is like the
expression of the thought
from that universal mind
or that divine source.
The thought's
being expressed out
through the sound, which
then manifests material
universe, material world.
>> When we come over
into the Americas,
the Pueblo Indians
talk about the spider,
how she sang the
world into existence.
[PEACEFUL MUSIC]
[CONCH BLOWING]
>> In Aztec mythology, the god
Quetzalcoatl used a conch shell
to create the vibration that
formed the first wave of life.
The Inuit say the raven made
the world and the waters
with the beat of his wings.
>> So it seems that no matter
where we go or what time
period, there's a belief
that sound was fundamental
to creation.
>> And equally remarkable, our
own genesis as human beings may
well have started
in a similar way.
>> When that embryo becomes
less than a millimeter in size,
very close to a millimeter
but not quite a millimeter,
the embryo already starts
to develop the first aspects
of the inner ear.
So the very first
sense organ that
is developed within the
embryo is the inner ear.
>> But then at 16 to 24 weeks,
the development has taken place
to a point where all my
five senses come online,
except my eyes are closed
and I'm in the dark,
and my nose and mouth
are filled with fluid,
so those aren't active.
But sound travels through
water five times better
than through air, so my total
experience when I'm in the womb
is hearing and vibration sense.
[MUFFLED VOICES]
>> That sound coming in to
the fetus, to the embryo,
is essential for the
development of the fetus.
The mother's voice
as well as voices
and sounds from the environment
outside, the language that
is spoken by the
mother, by the father,
those things are being heard
by that developing fetus.
And as they're coming
in through its own ears,
it's wiring its nervous system.
There are three times
as many connections
from the ears to
the brain as there
are from the eyes to the brain.
So the sounds coming
in through the ears
feed the neurological system.
The auditory nerve
directly connects
to every organ in the body.
>> It's like we're baptized in
sound and vibration and water.
And we all have our own mini
evolution that takes place.
We all have our own Big Bang.
In the beginning,
it was the void.
And all of a sudden,
there's an explosion of me.
[BABY CRYING]
Those sounds that it
continues to hear and learn
develop its perceptions.
It develops personality,
develops the way
the mind things based on
the language they speak,
and so forth.
[BABY SQUEALING]
>> The Gnostics believed that
it was our soul that manifests
our physical body.
Our physical body is
made in the image of God,
and its purpose ultimately
is a vehicle for the soul
as it moves its way
through this matrix.
>> Sound is the first sense
to develop in the womb
and the last sense
to go when we die.
Many ancient cultures had
practices for midwiving birth
and death, using sound,
music, spoken or sung prayers,
knowing the importance of
these critical thresholds.
>> That's very powerful, because
then that means that hearing
and sound must be coming
directly from source.
And that perhaps sound
as the first sense
is the way that we can most
directly connect with source.
>> Many traditions around the
world use symbols, instruments,
and songs to express
their origins.
In the Gnostic
tradition, existence
is represented as a circle
with a dot in the center.
Countless lines
radiate from the dot.
The periphery is considered
to be the underworld.
Actually, our waking
life, also known
as the dream of separation.
The lines connecting
to the center
represent a state closer
to who we really are.
The center point represents
our core existence,
which we can connect
to in deep sleep.
[PEACEFUL MUSIC]
>> The Aboriginals, whose
name means essentially
in the beginning, are the
oldest living culture on Earth.
They've been playing
the didgeridoo
for at least 150,000 years.
>> And what they do is they take
this root and they hollow it
out, and then make it
into almost like a bugle.
The tones and the frequencies
that come out of it
are spaced out in a way that
actually encode information.
>> And they say that the sound
of the didgeridoo connects us
to the dream time where
the ancestors reside,
and where we come from before
birth and where we go after we
die.
>> Australian Aborigines speak
of song lines or song paths
that were sung by their
primordial ancestor spirits who
walked across the landscape,
singing its land forms
into being.
For the Aborigines,
these songs are ongoing
and need to keep being sung.
>> Song lines are vibratory
paths that exist in a kind
of parallel dimension that the
Aboriginals use to navigate
over vast territories
and to gain knowledge.
>> It wasn't until I took a trip
to Tibet and went into a number
of the monasteries high in
the Himalayas that I began
to understand the mystical
secret of sound and its
relationship to creation.
What I saw were a
series of mandalas
that were placed on the walls.
And the monks told me,
this is the secret.
And I said, well,
what does that mean?
How does it work?
And he said, a long time ago
we had no way to record sound.
But we know that if we
project sound into matter,
it will create a pattern.
So what you see on
the temple walls
are the patterns
that are reminding
the monks and the nuns
that if they create
a very specific sound
to match that pattern,
then they are reproducing
the sound of their ancestors.
[SINGING]
>> Many ancient cultures put a
sacred or special value on song
and the spoken word.
[CHANTING]
>> We're talking about words.
We're talking about
spelling, and so we're
talking about casting spells.
That's why they
call it spell-ing.
And so words have power.
The ancients really knew this,
so they chose their words very,
very carefully.
Words were really
handpicked because they
understood the power of words.
>> There was a time not long ago
where humans could say my word
is as good as gold, and it was
as good as a signed contract.
The power to create
with language
comes from absolute
coherence, alignment,
and integrity between what
we think, say, and do.
>> By the words that we speak,
we are influencing that field
and that manifestation process.
But there are certain
words, certain power words,
certain ancient, divine
words that were often held
very secret because
of the power they
possess that were often used in
ceremony, magical operations,
and so forth.
>> Even in modern times,
scholars and inventors such
as Nikola Tesla have pondered
the many deep and mysterious
roles that sound plays
in the creation process.
>> Tesla had a quote,
and I'm paraphrasing,
that if you want to understand
the secrets of the universe
that you have to think of it
in terms of energy, frequency,
and vibration.
I really think he was
touching on something
really important and
really fundamental,
that matter is not a thing.
There's actually no thing in
what we call things, matter.
There is actually just
energy, vibration, frequency,
oscillations.
When you look at an atom
really, really close,
you don't see little
billiard balls.
The atom is made out
of 99.9999999% space.
And the part that's not space is
a little electromagnetic field
that's fluctuating.
And to think of that as
something solid is incorrect.
>> Can we be fooled by
what we think we see?
A pivotal figure
in ancient Greece
warned of the
dangers of believing
what we perceive with our eyes.
>> Plato is considered the
father of Western philosophy.
And he believed that we
don't live in the real world,
that we live in the
shadow of the real world.
And he conceived an
allegory called the cave.
And in this allegory, he
described a group of prisoners
who were shackled together.
Behind the prisoners was a
fire, and in between the fire
and the prisoners
were other people who
were playing with puppets
that were casting shadows
on the wall.
The prisoners all
believed that the shadows
that they were seeing
represented the real world.
And then in his allegory, Plato
allowed one of the prisoners
to escape.
He went out into the real
world, and then returned
and was actually blinded by
the light of the real world.
Seeing this, the
prisoners said, whoa,
we want to stay in
the shadow world.
We don't want to be
blinded by the light.
And this became a way of
describing our relationship
to reality.
>> Is it possible that our sense
of hearing is more dependable
than our sense of sight?
>> In Eastern cultures, the
ear is considered to be more
receptive, yin, and feminine,
while the eyes are considered
to be more active,
yang, and masculine.
The current age we live
in has place more emphasis
on yang or visual information
than on information we
receive from being
receptive and listening.
[CHIMING]
If we hear two tones
that are one hertz apart,
we can hear the difference as a
kind of pulsing binaural beat.
But if we look at two colors
that are one nanometer apart,
we cannot discern the
difference visually.
So this implies that the ears
are a more accurate sense
perception than the eyes.
>> American-British scientist
David Bohm said the world we
see is like a holographic image,
a kind of external tapestry
of impressions composed of
interference patterns of waves.
>> What he did was he recognized
that patterns tended to show up
repeatedly.
And why would that be?
Why would there be patterns?
After pondering
that for many years,
he came up with a beautiful
description of the way
he viewed the world, which
involved something that he
called the implicate order.
But what it means essentially
is that there is something there
that already exists.
It's pre-existing and it
needs to be activated.
So that's where the sound
comes in as a creative essence.
[DING]
If you take a tuning
fork and you hit it up
against a crystal, you
are going to resonate
the fork and the crystal.
And they're both going
to be oscillating
in a phase of coherency
and incoherency.
But at some point, they're
going to come into coherency.
They're going to be in
sympathetic resonance.
There's something
implicit in that crystal
that will respond
to that tuning fork.
So that's what the
implicate order means.
>> Today, people understand
that we live in a matrix,
and they understand that
sometimes that matrix is not
a very comfortable place, and
they're looking for ways to go
beyond the matrix.
And what we're discovering
is that sound is perhaps
the key literally of life.
It's the key to opening the
door to higher realities.
It's the key to opening
doors within ourselves.
So intimately, we know that
the way through the matrix
is to raise our vibration.
>> How do we raise
our vibration?
The universe offers many
hidden clues, some of which
have to do with sound
and mathematics.
Spiritual teacher and
philosopher George Gurdjieff
traveled the globe, uncovering
some of these ancient puzzle
pieces.
>> Gurdjieff was a Russian
mystic and composer who devised
what he called
the law of threes,
which essentially states that
for any phenomena to come
into existence, you have to have
what he described as a wholly
affirming, a wholly denying,
and then a wholly reconciling
force.
And unless all three
forces are present,
a phenomena is not going
to manifest in reality.
>> Every number in creation
is part of a sequence in which
another aspect of divine
power becomes expressed
into the world.
So there's a particular
power of one, power of two,
and three then is the
next in the sequence.
After we go from the unity to
the division into polarity,
polarity allows
movement to take place.
It allows attraction
and repulsion.
It allows evolution
to take place.
>> An ordinary or mundane
example of the law of three is
your car.
Your car has three gears.
It has a Forward gear,
it has a Reverse gear,
and a Neutral gear.
All three are essential.
>> The third element between the
two opposite polarities could
simply be neutral, between
positive and negative.
It could also be
understood, though,
as the particular union of
the positive and negative,
like a masculine and feminine
to then create a child.
That's what you would
see in something
like the Egyptian
tradition, where
you would see that the two
components would be Sekhmet
on one side as the
feminine component, Ptah
on the other as the
masculine component.
And when they unite, they
create Nefertum, the beauty
or fullness of creation
as their child.
[PIANO MUSIC]
>> The second ancient law that
Gurdjieff references is the law
of octaves.
This says that all vibrations
moving through matter
and through man
ascend, descend, grow
stronger or weaker precisely
as a musical octave develops.
>> Gurdjieff says the whole
universe is structured
in octaves.
I think he's actually accurate,
because the whole universe is
vibrational.
Therefore, octaves
are a fundamental part
a doubling of vibration
infinitely perhaps.
Basically, the structure
of the universe.
>> The human cell
is one such example.
>> If we just look at the cell,
as that cell becomes fertilized
with that seed of life, the
cell starts to take on kind
of a resonance, a frequency.
We could say a sound even.
>> And then as it starts
to multiply itself,
the one divides.
Through the cell
mitosis, it becomes two.
That 1 to 2 ratio
is the same that we
could relate to the octave.
There's a harmonic ratio that's
starting to happen there.
We have the one to the
two, the two to the four,
the four to the eighth,
the eighth to the 16th,
the 16th to 32.
So it keeps doubling.
So it's following this
harmonic sequence.
You can also see a lot of
correlations between the cell
division and the flower of life,
which is a sacred geometry.
So you have the one, and then
it divides and it becomes two.
And you have the
two overlapping.
You have the Vesica Pisces.
And then you have the four.
And then as you get
seven and eight,
you start to form
that seed of life
from the center of
the flower of light.
The same rules that govern
harmony and sound and music
are the same rules that
apply to sacred geometry,
and what becomes beautiful and
harmonic and life-enhancing
within the geometric forms.
[PIANO MUSIC]
>> We've got seven notes in an
octave, do, re, mi, fa, so, la,
si.
And when you look
at the mathematics,
you see certain
things show up there
that we see reflected in how
the universe is constructed.
For instance, when you
look at a piano and you see
there's two black keys
and then three black keys
and two black keys
and three black keys,
and there's two white keys with
a missing black key, right?
Why is that?
Why aren't there black
keys in between each one?
That's what Gurdjieff
called the mi-fa bridge.
Do, re, mi, fa.
Mi and fa is a half step
instead of a full step.
Full step, full step,
full step, half step.
Full step, full step, full
step at the octave, half step.
Two links where we
have half steps.
It's why there's no
straight lines in nature.
When the branch is growing, it's
growing through his do, re, mi.
The seed is splitting open, do.
The little shoot comes up,
pushes through the soil.
That's re.
Then a stalk starts to form.
That's mi.
It can't bridge the
mi-fa gap, and so it just
starts another do.
And that's why when it gets
up to this point, it forks.
Each of those forks forks,
and each of those forks
forks, and that forms
a fractal pattern.
>> Gurdjieff's mi-fa bridge
could be compared to what
ancient Greek philosopher
Pythagoras referred
to as the diatonic comma.
>> In Egyptian times, they
understood that there was
a particular gap between
the archetypal blueprint
for creation that exists
on a higher plane level.
And it's actually manifesting
down through multiple planes
until it crystallizes
that pattern
into a physical structure.
And there's often at least
a slight incongruence
between the perfect ideal
form and how it manifests
on the physical plane.
The idea of Pythagorean
comma was then
used to illustrate the
idea that everything
to manifest in
the physical world
is just a little bit off its
actual perfect archetype.
But in the Egyptian
tradition, it
was understood that
that slight imperfection
is what made it completely
unique and beautiful.
And that if things
were 100% the pattern
of the true ideal
higher archetype,
it may simply disappear
from physical creation
to begin with.
>> Like in the creation of
a pearl or in the seeding
of a crystal, these
slight imperfections allow
the formation of fractals, a
pattern you see again and again
throughout the universe.
>> In the 1970s, mathematician
Benoit Mandelbrot was working
with the newly developing
personal computers,
and especially
working with graphics.
They started plugging
equations into the computer,
and out pop these graphics
that are called fractals.
And what they noticed
is that no matter
how many times they
repeated this equation
that the fractal was a
mirror image at every level
of magnification.
What's interesting about
this is that if they wanted
to change any aspect
of the fractal,
they had to go back to
the original equation
and change it.
Now when they were working
with the Mandelbrot set,
they noticed that the Mandelbrot
set resembled a meditating
Buddha.
So they went back in
and changed the equation
and came up with what
they call the Buddhabrot.
Now this is really
extraordinary, because it tells
us that if we're made
in the image of God,
that perhaps we are
fractals of our creator.
And this aligns
perfectly with Buddhism,
that we're all trying to return
to our original and divine
nature.
[TRIUMPHANT MUSIC]
>> Author and scientist Michael
Hayes said that the resonance
between biology and cosmology
shows that life is music,
complete with overtones.
And it's no more
strikingly present
than in the helical structure
of life itself, DNA.
Hayes called this finding
the hermetic code.
>> Hermes is the Greek name
for the Egyptian god Thoth.
He's the god of
magic and alchemy,
and also is connected with
the concept of passing
through portals and gateways.
When the Greeks
talked about Hermes,
they were referring to this
ultimate ancient knowledge
which is called
the Emerald Tablet.
Most famous in
the Emerald Tablet
is the second verse that
says "as above, so below."
What it means is that
everything is in correspondence,
that what happens on
Earth has a counterpart
in the heavenly realms.
In the Bible, this is
part of the Lord's Prayer.
"On Earth as it is in Heaven."
That's a hermetic
expression, an expression
of his law of correspondences.
And essentially it
says that you and I are
a fractal of all of creation.
We're essentially a
printout of the cosmos,
that what happens within us also
happens in the greater cosmos,
and vice versa.
>> The Jewish Kabbalistic
tree offers a similar message.
>> The Kabbalistic tree is
typically described not just
as one tree, but a set of
four trees that are tied
at the root.
In the Kabbalistic tradition,
it was described as a mirroring,
as above so below type of
relationship between these four
trees that were tied to the
same sefirot at the center.
What we found was
that the center
of each one of those trees at
the root that connected them
was this first analytical
solution to gravity.
So that gravity is the hub.
It is the force that holds
all of the knowledge together,
right?
All of the information together.
Without gravity,
nothing would coalesce.
Nothing would become one thing.
It would all fly
apart, and nothing
would be able to make
a star, make a galaxy,
make a planet, or even a proton.
>> And so as above, so below
has this aspect that all
of the higher aspects
of creation are mirrored
into the physical
world in which we live.
And once we understand
that core pattern
through the use of
sacred geometry,
then we can see how both of
these are going to be connected
and how our actions
on the physical world
connect to and affect
the higher worlds,
and how the higher
worlds create and sustain
and effect us here
on this level.
[INSPIRING MUSIC]
>> Another way to look at it is
that a drop of water contains
the ocean, and the ocean
contains a drop of water.
Everything in the
universe is entangled.
>> The information of all the
protons in the universe is
present in one proton, because
they are all entangled to each
other.
We know in laboratory
that two particles
can be entangled in such a way
that even if the other one is
on the other side of the
universe, if you modify
this one, if you tickle this
one, the other one will laugh.
It's instantaneous.
>> Cause and effect is
one of the many principles
of the universe.
>> Is sound the
cause of creation,
or is it the effect of creation?
If you want to look at it
from the quantum physics idea,
is sound a particle or a wave?
Well, the answer
is, of course it is.
It is both.
It is causal.
It is effectual.
And it affects us as
well as effects us.
>> Ancient cultures used the
metaphor that the universe is
actually a cosmic symphony
singing a song to the creator.
[BIRD CHIRPING]
As ancient wisdom aligns
with modern science,
this concept is supported
by quantum theory, which
also proposes that the
cosmos is a kind of symphony
of vibrations.
Many ancient cultures
believed our unique role
was to play our particular
note as perfectly as possible
to make the creation complete.
This translates
as be who you are.
Up next on "Sound
of Creation," we
explore the mathematics
behind music.
Join us as we uncover the sonic
secrets behind sacred geometry.